DOC-8060: Docs for SQL Audit Logs: Restrict SQL activity logging by user/role (#17653)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.1/role-based-audit-logging.md

---
title: Role-based SQL Audit Logging
summary: Use the sql.log.user_audit cluster setting to turn SQL audit logging on or off for a user or role.
toc: true
docs_area: manage
---

Role-based SQL audit logging gives you detailed information about queries being executed against your system by specific users or roles. An event of type [`role_based_audit_event`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/eventlog.md %}#role_based_audit_event) is recorded when an executed query belongs to a user whose role membership corresponds to a role that is enabled to emit an audit log via the [`sql.log.user_audit` cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-sql-log-user-audit). The event is logged in the [`SENSITIVE_ACCESS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/logging.md %}#sensitive_access) logging channel.

{% include enterprise-feature.md %}

This page shows how to enable role-based SQL audit logging in CockroachDB, including:

- How to configure audit logging.

> - Where the audit log files live.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Where the audit log files are stored.
```

Author: Updated

> - What the audit log files look like.

Reviewer: Suggest linking these to the relevant sections

Author: Updated

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> Logging has performance implications. This feature enables you to log only what you require allowing you to limit logging and reduce impact to your workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logging can negatively impact performance. Log only what you require to limit impact to your workload.
```

Author: @kevin-v-ngo you previously asked me not to use the phrase "negatively impact performance", in favor of "has performance implications". Is this still your preference?

Author: reviewed with @kevin-v-ngo. He clarified that he meant:

```
Logging, in general, can negatively impact performance. Log only what you require to limit impact to your workload.
```

updated with above line.

{{site.data.alerts.end}}

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}
For the best visibility into security-related events on your cluster, we recommend configuring `SENSITIVE_ACCESS` together with the `USER_ADMIN`, `PRIVILEGES`, and `SESSIONS` logging channels. To learn more, see [Logging Use Cases]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/logging-use-cases.md %}#security-and-audit-monitoring).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

## Configure Logging

### Prerequisites

You must have:

- [`admin` role]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/security-reference/authorization.md %}#admin-role) or `MODIFYCLUSTERSETTING` [system privilege]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/security-reference/authorization.md %}#supported-privileges) to configure the cluster setting,
- an [Enterprise license configured]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/licensing-faqs.md %}#set-a-license), and
- your [logging infrastructure configured]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}), particularly the [location of audit logs](#file-storage-location).

### Syntax of audit settings

> With the [`sql.log.user_audit` cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-sql-log-user-audit), you can set an audit logging configuration using a table-like syntax, as seen in the [Examples](#examples). Each row in the configuration represents an audit setting and must be separated by a new line. An audit setting is comprised of two columns separated by a space:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the [`sql.log.user_audit` cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-sql-log-user-audit), you can set an audit logging configuration using a table-like syntax, as shown in the [Examples](#examples). Each row in the configuration represents an audit setting and must be separated by a new line. An audit setting is comprised of two columns separated by a space:
```
style guide nit, try to avoid "see/seen"

Author: updated

- `USER/ROLE`: the name of the user or role you want to audit.
    - The *special* `USER/ROLE` value `ALL` applies the audit setting to *all* users.
- `STATEMENT_FILTER`: the statement filter for the role. The following keywords are valid:
    - `ALL` will enable audit logging for all SQL statements for the given audit setting.
    - `NONE` will exclude audit logging for all SQL statements for the given audit setting.

Once `sql.log.user_audit` is set, the default behavior is for role-based SQL audit logging to take effect immediately within user sessions.

### Matching order

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
The order in which the audit settings in the configuration are specified is important, as seen in the [example of a user with multiple roles](#user-with-multiple-roles). When determining whether to emit a log, the first audit setting that matches a user is the audit setting that gets applied. 
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> For each statement executed, CockroachDB gets the user's role memberships and iterates through the audit settings, looking for a matching audit setting by role or username. At the first audit setting match, CockroachDB stops iteration. If auditing is enabled -  - the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `ALL` - for the matching audit setting, the statement is logged as an audit event. If the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `NONE`, the statement is not logged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each statement executed, CockroachDB gets the user's role memberships and iterates through the audit settings, looking for a matching audit setting by role or username. At the first audit setting match, CockroachDB stops iteration. If auditing is enabled (the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `ALL`) for the matching audit setting, the statement is logged as an audit event. If the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `NONE`, the statement is not logged.
```

Author: updated

### Validate setting

You can check the value of the `sql.log.user_audit` setting by running the [`SHOW CLUSTER SETTING`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-cluster-setting.md %}) command:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SHOW CLUSTER SETTING sql.log.user_audit;
~~~

## File format

Audit log messages, like all [log messages]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/logging-overview.md %}), consist of two sections:

> - A payload that contains notable events structured in JSON. These can include information such as the application name, full text of the query (which may contain PII), user account that triggered the event, number of rows produced (e.g., for `SELECT`) or processed (e.g., for `INSERT` or `UPDATE`), status of the query, and more. For more details on the information logged, see common fields of [`role_based_audit_event`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/eventlog.md %}#role_based_audit_event).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A payload that contains notable events structured in JSON. These can include information such as the application name, full text of the query (which may contain PII), user account that triggered the event, number of rows produced (e.g., for `SELECT`) or processed (e.g., for `INSERT` or `UPDATE`), status of the query, and more. For more details on the information logged, refer to common fields of [`role_based_audit_event`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/eventlog.md %}#role_based_audit_event).
```

Author: updated

- All remaining users will not emit audit logs for any statements they issue.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING sql.log.user_audit = '
    test_role       ALL
    another_role    NONE
    ALL             NONE
';
~~~

### User with multiple roles

With the audit settings in this example,

- Users with the username or role `test_role` will not emit audit logs for any statements they issue.
- Users with the username or role `another_role` will emit audit logs for all statements they issue.
- All remaining users will not emit audit logs for any statements they issue.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING sql.log.user_audit = '
    test_role       NONE
    another_role    ALL
    ALL             NONE
';
~~~

Grant an existing user, `test_user`, both roles `test_role` and `another_role`:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
GRANT test_role to test_user;
GRANT another_role to test_user;
~~~

> If `test_user` executes a statement, an audit log will not be emitted. In this case, CockroachDB would match `test_user` to role `test_role` which is listed first and has the `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `NONE`. Even though `test_user` is a member of role `another_role` which has `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `ALL`, CockroachDB does not match `test_user` to that role because it is listed second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `test_user` executes a statement, an audit log will not be emitted. In this case, CockroachDB would match `test_user` to role `test_role`, which is listed first and has the `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `NONE`. Even though `test_user` is a member of role `another_role` which has `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `ALL`, CockroachDB does not match `test_user` to that role because it is listed second.
```

Author: updated

---
title: Role-based SQL Audit Logging

> summary: Use the EXPERIMENTAL_AUDIT setting to turn SQL audit logging on or off for a table.

Reviewer 2: I think this is using an old summary

Author: updated

    - `ALL` will enable audit logging for all SQL statements for the given audit setting.
    - `NONE` will exclude audit logging for all SQL statements for the given audit setting.

Once `sql.log.user_audit` is set, the default behavior is for role-based SQL audit logging to take effect immediately within user sessions.

### Matching order

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
The order in which the audit settings in the configuration are specified is important, as seen in the [example of a user with multiple roles](#user-with-multiple-roles). When determining whether to emit a log, the first audit setting that matches a user is the audit setting that gets applied. 
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

For each statement executed, CockroachDB gets the user's role memberships and iterates through the audit settings, looking for a matching audit setting by role or username. At the first audit setting match, CockroachDB stops iteration. If auditing is enabled -  - the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `ALL` - for the matching audit setting, the statement is logged as an audit event. If the `STATEMENT_FILTER` is set to `NONE`, the statement is not logged.

### Validate setting

> You can check the value of the `sql.log.user_audit` setting by running the [`SHOW CLUSTER`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-cluster-setting.md %}) command:

Reviewer 2: Should be `SHOW CLUSTER SETTING` instead of `SHOW CLUSTER`

Author: updated

    another_role    NONE
    ALL             NONE
';
~~~

### User with multiple roles

With the audit settings in this example,

- Users with the username or role `test_role` will not emit audit logs for any statements they issue.
- Users with the username or role `another_role` will emit audit logs for all statements they issue.
- All remaining users will not emit audit logs for any statements they issue.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING sql.log.user_audit = '
    test_role       NONE
    another_role    ALL
    ALL             NONE
';
~~~

Grant an existing user, `test_user`, both roles `test_role` and `another_role`:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
GRANT test_role to test_user;
GRANT another_role to test_user;
~~~

If `test_user` executes a statement, an audit log will not be emitted. In this case, CockroachDB would match `test_user` to role `test_role` which is listed first and has the `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `NONE`. Even though `test_user` is a member of role `another_role` which has `STATEMENT_FILTER` set to `ALL`, CockroachDB does not match `test_user` to that role because it is listed second.

## See also

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer 2: Looks like you have a merge conflict here?

Author: updated
